# Pointers

## Concepts

Each variable defined in go is saved in memory on the stack. The stack is an addressable piece of memory. Here's how you can find the address (**pointer**) of the variable on the stack:

```go
...
func main() {
    var x int = 2
    var y *int = &x
    var z int = *y
    fmt.Println(x, y, z, *&x)
    fmt.Printf("%T, %T, %T\n", x, y, z)
}
```

Let's dissect this, but before we do, know that `*` is overloaded: it means two, albeit similar, things.

`var y *int = &x`
- The type of y is `*int` - a pointer to an int.
- The value of y is `&x` - the address of x.

`var z int = *y`
- The value of z is `*y` - the dereference of y.

`fmt.Println(x, y, z, *&x)`
- x is 2, y is the address of x, and z is the value at the address of y (which is x).
- `*` and `&` are inverses - so `*&x` is also the same as `*&*&x`.

What two things does `*` mean?
- It helps describe a type, as in `var y *int`.
- It **dereferences** a pointer - i.e. it resolves a pointer to a value. You can think of this as a function that turns an `*int` into an `int`, or more generically `*T` to `T`.

I've found thinking about pointers like dog leashes to be a good mental model:
- You can "hang on" to the leash (pointer) of an object.
- You can "hand the leash" to anyone else easily.
- You don't use leashes for mice (basic types like `int`), they are easy to carry and small.

Lastly, the use of pointers allow you to hand the leash of data to functions so that they can derefence and modify data:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
    a := 1
    b := 1
    addOne(&a)
    dontAddOne(b)
    fmt.Println(a, b)
}

func addOne(i *int) {
    *i++
}

func dontAddOne(i int) {
    i++
}
```

## Exercises
Find the size of an int, and int64, using pointers.

Hints:
- When you declare two vars next to eachother, they are next to eachother in memory.
- `go doc fmt Sprintf`
- "%d" formats the string in decimal.
- `go doc strconv atoi`

## Tips

- The zero-value of a pointer is always nil.

## Further Reading

---

[up](Readme.md) -- [next](3.2.md)