# Channels

## Concepts
The `sleep` in the previous section has many issues: It doesn't accurately describe the goal of waiting for all goroutines to exit before exiting, and it is inherently a race condition. Channels allow goroutines to be coordinated.

Channels allow you to send data between goroutines in a first-in first-out fashion.

First let's explore channels with the smallest goroutine possible, before jumping into more complex examples:

```go
package main

import (
    "fmt"
    "time"
)

func main() {
    codes := make(chan int)
    func() {
        time.Sleep(4 * time.Second)
        codes <- 1
    }()
    code := <-codes
    fmt.Println(code)
}
```

Breaking this down line by line:

`codes := make(chan int)`
- initializes `codes` as a **unbuffered channel** for ints.
- We could not write `var codes chan int` because the zero value would be nil.

`func() { ... }()`
- This is an anonymous closure.
- `codes <- 1` sends 1 to `codes`.
- sends block until the receiver is ready to receive.

`code := <-codes`
- This operation waits until `codes` has a value to give.
- `<-codes` receives 1 from `codes` and initalizes `code` with it.
- receives block until the sender is ready to send.

Stop and remove the anonymous function the pushes 1 to `codes` from program and re-run it. What happens?

```
fatal error: all goroutines are asleep - deadlock!
```

This tells us that `code := <-codes` is deadlocked because there are no goroutines to push data into `codes`.

### Bufferred Channels

The difference between buffered channels and unbuffered channels is:
1. There is no blocking on sends unless the buffer is completely full.
2. There is no blocking on receives unless the buffer is empty.
3. Buffered channels are initialized with `make(chan type, N)` with type being the data type of the channel, and N being the size of the buffer.

Let's recreate the previous example from [5.1](5.1.md) using buffered channels:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

var saidHi chan bool = make(chan bool, 3)

func main() {
    for _, name := range []string{"Andrew", "Beavis", "Cory"} {
        go sayHi(name)
    }
    for i := 0; i < 3; i++ {
        <-saidHi
    }
}

func sayHi(n string) {
    fmt.Println(n)
    saidHi <- true
}
```

### Directional Arguments

```go
func someFunction(success chan bool, other string) {
```

This function signature takes a `chan bool` and a `string`, but doesn't describe how the channel is going to be used. We could make this function signature more descriptive by saying that `success` will only be sent to and never received from:

```go
func someFunction(success chan<- bool, name string) {
```

To describe a channel that is only received from in a function signature, we could write `<-chan bool`.

### Select statements

Select statements can be used to provide non-blocking channel operations:

```go
select {
case code := <-codes:
    fmt.Println(code)
default:
    fmt.Println("No code received. Continuing")
}s
```

What happens when we would like to receive from multiple channels at once? You could create a goroutine for each one, but sometimes that causes explosive complexity. You can also use `select` for this:
```go
select {
case code := <-codes:
    fmt.Println(code + 1)
case msg := <-messages:
    fmt.Println(msg)
}
```

The above example is blocking until one of codes or messages sends a value. If `default` is added, it would be non-blocking.

### close()

Closing a channel indicates no more data is going to be sent over it:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

var data = make(chan bool, 2)

func main() {
    go AddValues()
    for {
        element, more := <-data
        if more {
            fmt.Println(element)
        } else {
            break
        }
    }
    fmt.Println("complete")
}

func AddValues() {
    data <- true
    data <- false
    close(data)
}
```

The important pieces from above:

`element, more := <-data`
- Similar to type casting or map indexing, we can include a second variable `more` to determine if the channel is closed.

`close(data)`
- This indicates that no more data will be sent.

The last thing that `close` empowers you to do is use channels with `range`:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
    x := make(chan bool, 5)
    x <- false
    x <- true
    close(x)
    for el := range x {
        fmt.Println(el)
    }
}
```

## Exercises

## Tips

While important, goroutines and channels add complexity and make debugging much harder. Ensure that the concurrency fits the problem before diving into a solution.

## Further Reading

Memory leaks? [Totally possible](https://www.ardanlabs.com/blog/2018/11/goroutine-leaks-the-forgotten-sender.html) with goroutines and channels.

---

[prev](5.1.md) -- [up](Readme.md) -- [next](5.3.md)