# Packages

Packages allow developers to create and reuse existing pieces of code.

## Concepts

Recapping packages from our previous section:
  - Every file in go belongs to a package.
  - `main` tells the Go compiler that the package should compile as an executable program instead of a shared library.
  - Package names are lowercase, and have no underscores.
  - Packages help group data and logic together.

We previously saw `fmt` being imported on a single line. Below we demonstrate a multiline import, which is easier on the
eye when there are many packages.


To use a package, we'll first need to import it:

```go
package main

import (
	"fmt"                           // stdlib
	"math/rand"                     // stdlib
	"github.com/sirupsen/logrus"    // remote package
)

func main() {
	...
}
```
There is a slight distinction between the **import path** (seen above), and the package that is imported:

| import path | package name |
| -- | -- |
| fmt | fmt |
| math/rand | rand |
| github.com/sirupsen/logrus | logrus |

After importing the packages, you use them:
```go
...

func main() {
  fmt.Println("hi", rand.Int())
  logrus.Info("Complete")
}
```

Besides the stdlib and remote packages, you can also create and use local packages.
A go project often looks like this:
```
main.go
pkg/
   example/
          file_one.go
          file_two.go
   another/
          file_one.go
          file_two.go

```

There is one last piece of the puzzle: downloading remote packages
so they can be imported, and configuring your go project correctly to use local packages.
(Un)fortunately, this has changed in recent versions of go, and we'll see why in the next section.


## Exercises

What happens when you import a package that isn't used?

## Tips

- Checkout the [stdlib docs](https://golang.org/pkg/#stdlib) to explore packages that you can use.

## Further reading

There are a few more things that `import` is capable of: aliasing, unqualified imports, and running functions.
[This](https://medium.com/golangspec/import-declarations-in-go-8de0fd3ae8ff) article provides detail, but I would recommend
waiting until you see these in projects before learning about them to gain context into _why_ they are being used.

---

[prev](1.2.md) -- [up](Readme.md) -- [next](1.3.1.md)